Assisted Generation support for Gaudi (#2040)
huggingface/blog: assisted-generation-support-gaudi.md

There is a technique similar to Speculative Sampling, known as Assisted Generation. This was developed independently around the same time [3]. The author integrated this method into Hugging Face Transformers, and the *.generate()* call now has an optional *assistant_model* parameter to enable this method.

## Usage & Experiments

The usage of Assisted Generation is straightforward. As would be expected, the parameter `--assistant_model` is used to specify the draft model. The draft model is used to generate K tokens, which are then evaluated in the target model. The target model is used to generate the next token when the draft model is rejected. The draft model is used to generate the next K tokens, and the process repeats. As the acceptance rate of the draft model is partly dependent on the input text. Typically, we have seen speed ups of about 2x for large transformer-based models.

## Conclusion

> Accelerating text generation with Gaudi with assisted generation is now supported and easy to use. The method is compatible with other optimizations (e.g. static shapes, bucketing) and can be used to improve performance on Intel Gaudi processors. The method is based on Speculative Sampling, which has been shown to be effective in improving performance on large transformer-based models.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Accelerating text generation with Gaudi with assisted generation is now supported and easy to use. This can be used to improve performance on Intel Gaudi processors. The method is based on Speculative Sampling, which has been shown to be effective in improving performance on large transformer-based models.
```
Let's remove the part about being compatible with other optimizations because it currently doesn't work with static shapes and bucketing.

---
title: "Faster assisted generation support for Intel Gaudi"

> thumbnail: /blog/assets/assisted-generation/thumbnail.png

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
thumbnail: /blog/assets/assisted-generation-support-gaudi/thumbnail.png
```

Author: Agreed

> authors:
> - user: haimbarad
> - guest: true
> - user: nraste
> - guest: true
> - user: joeychou
> - guest: true

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
authors:
- user: haimbarad
  guest: true
  org: Habana
- user: nraste
  guest: true
  org: Habana
- user: joeychou
  guest: true
  org: Habana
```

Author: Wouldn't it be more accurate to write Intel for the org? I'll update it that way.

---

# Faster assisted generation support for Intel Gaudi

> ## Introduction
> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

It's usually not necessary to add a section header after the title, this is an example of how it's rendered: https://huggingface.co/blog/tgi-benchmarking

> As model sizes grow, Generative AI implementations require significant inference resources. This not only increases the cost per generation from a prompt, but also increases the power consumption used to serve such requests.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As model sizes grow, Generative AI implementations require significant inference resources. This not only increases the cost per generation, but also increases the power consumption used to serve such requests.
```

Author: Agreed.

Inference optimizations for text generation are essential for reducing latency, infrastructure costs, and power consumption. This can lead to an improved user experience and increased efficiency in text generation tasks.

> Assisted decoding is a popular method for speeding up text generation. We adapted and optimized it for Intel Gaudi, which deliver similar performance as Nvidia H100 GPUs as shown in [a previous post](https://huggingface.co/blog/bridgetower) while its price is in the same ballpark as Nvidia A100 80GB GPUs. This work is now part of Optimum Habana, which extends various Hugging Face libraries like Transformers and Diffusers so that your AI workflows are fully optimized for Intel Gaudi processors.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Assisted decoding is a popular method for speeding up text generation. We adapted and optimized it for Intel Gaudi, which delivers similar performance as Nvidia H100 GPUs as shown in [a previous post](https://huggingface.co/blog/bridgetower), while its price is in the same ballpark as Nvidia A100 80GB GPUs. This work is now part of Optimum Habana, which extends various Hugging Face libraries like Transformers and Diffusers so that your AI workflows are fully optimized for Intel Gaudi processors.
```

Author: Agreed

## Speculative Sampling - Assisted Decoding

> In order to gain an appreciation of why speculative sampling works, let us take a step back and visit Autoregressive Sampling. We will see that the process is memory bound, allowing us to essentially test K tokens on the target model, in parallel, for the same cost as sampling just one token. So, having a decent acceptance rate means that many of the tokens are generated fast enough to compensate for the extra overhead of generating on a draft model and then checking the batch of K candidate tokens in a target model.

Reviewer 2: Maybe we should very briefly and conceptually introduce speculative sampling before this sentence, otherwise people may not know what the "draft" model or "testing K tokens in parallel" mean.

Author: Done

A method of text generation is to generate next tokens based upon a probability conditioned on previous tokens, as given by:

$p(\tilde{x}_{n+1} | x_1, ..., x_n)$ 

where $x_1, ..., x_n$ are the tokens generated so far. This is known as autoregressive sampling and is now a standard method of text-generation in generative models. This could be followed by one of several methods to select the token at $n+1$, for example, argmax or randomly selected from top-$p$. 

> Note that sampling of models is memory intensive. Shazeer [1] shows that the ratio of memory access to arithmetic operations is very memory intensive for transformer-based sequential sampling. Chen et al. [2] attribute the overall sampling time for large transformer-based models to linear layers, attention, and collective operations (all-reduce). We focus on a batch size of one for inference, but we can leverage a batch size of K words (sampled from a smaller draft model) to be evaluated in the target model together, taking about the same time as sampling a single token from the target model. For a reasonable value of K, we can, therefore, use the smaller draft model for much of the text generation, using the target model less often for evaluation (i.e., acceptance or rejection) and single token generation when rejection occurs. We have seen a significant increase in throughput using this method.

Reviewer 2: I agree with @regisss that this section could feel more welcoming to a general audience if it didn't sound so much as a research paper. I think conceptual and intuitive explanations are fine, and it's enough, in my opinion, to cite at the end of the post. Just a personal opinion, of course.

Author: OK - I've reworked this to take out the overly technical stuff. I still leave in the point that the target distribution is recovered, and this guarantees quality. I've had many people ask me this and while many don't understand probability distributions, it important that they realize that quality isn't sacrificed using this technique.

There is a technique similar to Speculative Sampling, known as Assisted Generation. This was developed independently around the same time [3]. The author integrated this method into Hugging Face Transformers, and the *.generate()* call now has an optional *assistant_model* parameter to enable this method.

## Usage & Experiments

The usage of Assisted Generation is straightforward. As would be expected, the parameter `--assistant_model` is used to specify the draft model. The draft model is used to generate K tokens, which are then evaluated in the target model. The target model is used to generate the next token when the draft model is rejected. The draft model is used to generate the next K tokens, and the process repeats. As the acceptance rate of the draft model is partly dependent on the input text. Typically, we have seen speed ups of about 2x for large transformer-based models.

> # Conclusion

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Conclusion
```

Author: Suggestion taken.

Accelerating text generation with Gaudi with assisted generation is now supported and easy to use. The method is compatible with other optimizations (e.g. static shapes, bucketing) and can be used to improve performance on Intel Gaudi processors. The method is based on Speculative Sampling, which has been shown to be effective in improving performance on large transformer-based models.

> # References

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## References
```

---
title: "Assisted Generation Support for Intel Gaudi"
thumbnail: /blog/assets/assisted-generation/thumbnail.png
authors:
- user: haimbarad
- guest: true
- user: nraste
- guest: true
- user: joeychou
- guest: true
---

> # Assisted Generation Support for Intel Gaudi

Author: Sounds good - change made.

Note that the authors [2] prove that the target distribution is recovered when performing speculative sampling - this guarantees the same sampling quality as autoregressive sampling on the target itself. Therefore, the situations where not leveraging speculative sampling is not worthwhile have to do with the case where there are not enough savings in the relative size of the draft model or the acceptance rate of the draft model is not high enough to benefit from the smaller size of the draft model.

There is a technique similar to Speculative Sampling, known as Assisted Generation. This was developed independently around the same time [3]. The author integrated this method into HuggingFace Transformers, and the *.generate()* call now has an optional *assistant_model* parameter to enable this method.

## Optimum-Habana

> HuggingFace Optimum is an extension of their popular Transformers library, but with a focus on performance and efficiency for specific hardware. Support is now available for Speculative Sampling (Assisted Generation) within optimum-habana for Intel Gaudi processors.

Author: Agreed - it's redundant. Deleted.

## Usage & Experiments

> The usage of Assisted Generation is straightforward. As would be expected, the parameter `--assistant_model` is used to specify the draft model. The draft model is used to generate K tokens, which are then evaluated in the target model. The target model is used to generate the next token when the draft model is rejected. The draft model is used to generate the next K tokens, and the process repeats.

Author: Correct. This is part of the code PR to provide support.

# Conclusion

> Accelerating text generation with Gaudi with assisted generation is now supported and easy to use. The method is compatible with other optimizations and can be used to improve performance on Intel Gaudi processors. The method is based on Speculative Sampling, which has been shown to be effective in improving performance on large transformer-based models. The method is also compatible with other optimizations, such as quantization, and can be used to improve performance on Intel Gaudi processors.

Author: Agreed

---
title: "Assisted Generation Support for Intel Gaudi"
thumbnail: /blog/assets/assisted-generation/thumbnail.png
authors:

> - user: haimbarad
> - user: nraste
> - user: joeychou

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- user: haimbarad
  guest: true
- user: nraste
  guest: true
- user: joeychou
  guest: true
```

Author: Done

---

# Assisted Generation Support for Intel Gaudi

## Abstract

> As model sizes grow, there is a requirement for efficient inference optimizations in generative AI implementations. This not only reduces latency and infrastructure costs but also minimizes power consumption. We now announce that Intel Gaudi supports Assisted Decoding-Speculative Sampling, which leverages a smaller draft model to generate candidate tokens in parallel and then evaluates them in the target model. We demonstrate that this approach significantly increases throughput without compromising the quality of the generated text. Optimum-Habana, an extension of the HuggingFace library optimized for Intel Gaudi processors, now supports the Assisted Decoding. Our experiments show the effectiveness of this method in improving performance on Intel Gaudi processors. Overall, our work contributes to the field of assisted generation support for efficient text generation in large-scale models.

Reviewer: I would remove that as it makes the post look too much as a research article. And move the mentions to Intel Gaudi and Optimum Habana in the introduction below.

Author: Good suggestions - done.
